

Document Scanning: Digital Archives

Here are some things to consider in making an informed decision:

Should you scan every file in your cabinets? Maybe Yes and maybe No. 
You may want to consider doing some “housecleaning” and scan only the files that need to be retained.
The same goes for documents within a file folder. Not every document may need to be scanned for archiving. Some documents could be duplicates, or just “notes” that do not have to be kept.
Some things like leases, contracts, property purchase documents, and improvement documentation, etc. may need to be kept almost forever. You may also want these as “Paper Documents”. Now is a good time to make sure they are in a secure, fireproof place with limited access. 

How much time and effort will be required to prepare the files for scanning? This will vary from one situation to another. There is no “set” amount of time that can be allocated.
Removal of staples and organizing the files for scanning will take a lot of time. There is no shortcut here. This is labor intensive. Go through a few files and see how long it takes on average. It is usually longer than you would think. There will be “sticky notes” that must be either placed correctly or put on a separate page that need to stay with a document. There will likely be torn pages that will not feed through an Automatic Document Feeder (ADF). These may need to be copied first. 
Do you have the staff (with time to spare) to perform this? If not, do you want to hire, and train employees for this?
This is a balance of time and money to evaluate the cost. Not only will the time (and cost) of the employee assigned to prepare the files be expensive, but the “lost opportunity” time of this employee's normal work, may be expensive.

Is the equipment (document scanner) available to be used? 
If not there is cost involved to add equipment, and the time to get it set up – usually short. Consideration should be given as to whether or not the scanner will be used later.
Outsourcing this service may be an alternative. This eliminates the cost to purchase a scanner that may not be needed in the future. It also frees up employee's time to continue their “normal” work. 

Where to start?
Will an area of the business documents be archived first? This could be a department, such as accounting, sales, receipts, etc. 
This may be time relative. There could be departments or times of the year that employees can spare time to do this.
Will all departments for a period of time (last week, month, year etc.) be archived?
Will the documents be needed while they are being scanned?

What format to scan the documents into? Think about how you will use them. There are several options here.
Portable Document Format (PDF) is the standard. The only software required to open this type is Adobe Acrobat Reader. This is a free download and most computers already are using it. This also gives alternatives on the type of pdf you will have the documents in.
Image only is the easiest, cheapest method of scanning the documents. This is like looking through a file folder for a copy (page) of a certain document. Search within the document is not available. It can be enhanced with bookmarks in documents that are used often. Mostly the search is done with your eyes. 
Searchable Image  This allows  a search within the document for a word or phrase. This is also helpful if you are not sure where a particular document is filed, but know something unique about it, such as an invoice number. A “windows search” for that number will result in a list of documents with that number within it. This is slower, takes more space (larger file size), and more costly, but might be worth the added cost.

Will this be done in house or outsourced? Now it is time to decide if you will scan your documents or pay somebody else to.
In House Advantages:
Work at your own pace
Use existing equipment
Use existing employees

Outsourced Advantages:
Frees up employee's time to continue ongoing work
Eliminates need to purchase equipment 
Eliminates need to train employees
Eliminates need to designate space for scanning
Service providers understand how to do this accurately


## I have a Scanner

Let me turn your dead trees into digital success!  This is the answer you've been waiting for.



